README.md, before:

# FrugalScan 💰

> Privacy-first personal finance insights in 60 seconds. No account linking required.

[![Live Demo](https://img.shields.io/badge/demo-frugalscan.com-blue)](https://frugalscan.com)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Next.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Next.js-14-black)](https://nextjs.org/)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5-blue)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)

## 🎯 What is FrugalScan?

FrugalScan analyzes your bank statement PDFs using AI to reveal spending patterns, detect subscriptions, and provide personalized financial insights—all without requiring you to link your bank account.

**[Try it live →](https://frugalscan.com)**

### The Problem

Traditional budgeting apps require linking your bank account, which many people find uncomfortable. They're also overwhelming with features most users never need. Sometimes you just want quick answers: *Where is my money going?*

### The Solution

Upload a bank statement PDF. Get actionable insights in 60 seconds. No signup, no account linking, no persistent data storage.

---

## ✨ Features

### Current (v1.0)
- ✅ **AI-Powered PDF Parsing** - 99.7% accuracy across all bank formats using Claude API
- ✅ **Smart Categorization** - 200+ merchant keywords automatically categorize spending
- ✅ **Subscription Detection** - Identifies recurring charges you might have forgotten
- ✅ **Personalized Insights** - AI-generated observations about your spending patterns
- ✅ **Interactive Charts** - Visualize spending by category and merchant
- ✅ **Category Drill-Down** - Click any category to see top merchants within it
- ✅ **Privacy-First** - No database, no accounts, no data persistence
- ✅ **Multi-Page Support** - Parallel processing handles statements up to 20+ pages
- ✅ **Mobile Responsive** - Works on all devices
- ✅ **Export Ready** - Print or save results as PDF

### Coming Soon (v1.1-1.2)
- 🔜 **Budget Targets** - Set spending limits per category
- 🔜 **Month-over-Month Trends** - Compare multiple statements
- 🔜 **Enhanced AI Insights** - More specific, surprising observations
- 🔜 **Color-Coded Charts** - Visual category consistency across all charts

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Tech Stack

| Layer | Technology | Why |
|-------|------------|-----|
| Framework | Next.js 14 (App Router) | SSR, API routes, modern React patterns |
| Language | TypeScript | Type safety, better developer experience |
| Styling | Tailwind CSS v3 | Rapid development, Apple-inspired design |
| AI | Claude API (Anthropic) | Native PDF reading, best-in-class accuracy |
| Charts | Recharts | Full control over styling and interactions |
| Hosting | Vercel | Seamless deployment, edge functions |

### Why Claude API for PDF Parsing?

Initial attempts with `pdf-parse` + regex achieved only 70-85% accuracy and required maintaining 50+ regex patterns for different bank formats.

Claude API's native PDF reading delivers:
- **99.7% accuracy** (tested on 196 transactions, $10,703 total)
- **Universal compatibility** (works with all bank formats)
- **Context understanding** (handles refunds, pending transactions, foreign currency)
- **Zero maintenance** (no brittle regex patterns)

**Trade-off:** ~$0.02 per analysis (Haiku) + $0.05 for insights (Sonnet) = **$0.07 total cost per user**

See [ARCHITECTURE_DECISION_RECORD.md](Claude/ARCHITECTURE_DECISION_RECORD.md) for full rationale.

### Data Flow

```
1. PDF Upload
   ↓
   User uploads bank statement PDF via drag-and-drop
   ↓
   app/api/parse-statement/route.ts
   ↓
   lib/parse-with-claude.ts
   ├── If >5 pages: Split into 4-page chunks → Parallel processing (3 concurrent)
   └── If ≤5 pages: Single request
   ↓
   RawTransaction[] (validated against schema)
   ↓

2. Client-Side Categorization
   ↓
   lib/categorize.ts
   ├── cleanMerchantName() - Remove junk, standardize format
   ├── categorizeTransaction() - Match 200+ keywords → category
   └── detectSubscriptions() - Whitelist known services
   ↓
   CategorizedTransaction[] + Subscription[]
   ↓

3. Analysis & Insights
   ↓
   lib/analysis.ts
   ├── calculateSummary() - Totals, averages, top category
   ├── getCategoryBreakdown() - For pie chart
   └── getTopMerchants() - For bar chart
   ↓
   app/api/analyze/route.ts
   ↓
   lib/claude-insights.ts
   └── generateInsights() - AI-powered personalized tips
   ↓
   AnalysisResult displayed in results dashboard
```

**Key Design Decisions:**
- **Categorization is client-side** - Reduces API costs, instant feedback
- **Parallel processing for large PDFs** - 4-page chunks, max 3 concurrent requests
- **Strict validation** - All transactions validated before categorization
- **Positive amounts only** - `type` field indicates debit/credit direction

---

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ and npm
- Anthropic API key ([get one here](https://console.anthropic.com/))

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/frugalscan.git
cd frugalscan

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Set up environment variables
cp .env.example .env.local
# Edit .env.local and add your ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
```

### Development

```bash
# Start development server
npm run dev

# Open http://localhost:3000
```

### Build for Production

```bash
# Build the application
npm run build

# Start production server
npm start
```

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```
frugalscan/
├── app/
│   ├── api/
│   │   ├── parse-statement/    # PDF parsing endpoint
│   │   └── analyze/             # AI insights endpoint
│   ├── results/                 # Results dashboard page
│   └── page.tsx                 # Landing page
├── components/
│   ├── ui/                      # Reusable UI components
│   ├── charts/                 # Data visualizations
│   └── sections/                # Page sections
├── lib/
│   ├── parse-with-claude.ts     # PDF parsing orchestrator
│   ├── categorize.ts            # Transaction categorization
│   ├── analysis.ts              # Summary calculations
│   └── claude-insights.ts       # AI insights generation
├── types/
│   └── index.ts                 # TypeScript interfaces
└── contexts/
    └── AnalysisContext.tsx      # Shared analysis state
```

See [CODE_ARCHITECTURE.md](CODE_ARCHITECTURE.md) for detailed architecture documentation.

---

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env.local` file:

```env
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
```

### Parallel Processing Settings

In `lib/parse-with-claude.ts`:
- **Chunk size:** 4 pages per chunk (optimal balance)
- **Concurrency:** 3 simultaneous requests (rate limit safe)
- **Threshold:** PDFs >5 pages use parallel processing

### Categorization Keywords

Add merchant keywords in `lib/constants.ts` under `MERCHANT_KEYWORDS` to improve categorization accuracy.

---

## 🧪 Testing

### Manual Testing Checklist

When modifying parsing or categorization:

1. **Accuracy:** Transaction count matches expected
2. **Totals:** Debits/credits match statement summary
3. **Validation:** No transactions rejected (check console)
4. **Categories:** <15% in "Other" category
5. **Charts:** Pie shows categories, bar shows merchants (high→low)
6. **Subscriptions:** Known services detected
7. **Merchant names:** Cleaned properly (no junk codes)

### Test Data

Use real bank statement PDFs (anonymized) to test accuracy. Current test results:
- **196 transactions** tested
- **$10,703 total** processed
- **99.7% accuracy** achieved

---

## 📊 Performance

### Current Metrics

| Metric | Value |
|--------|-------|
| Parse time (5 pages) | ~20 seconds |
| Parse time (13 pages) | ~56 seconds (parallel) |
| Accuracy | 99.7% |
| Cost per analysis | ~$0.07 |
| Client-side categorization | <100ms |

### Optimization Opportunities

- **Caching:** Identical PDFs could be cached
- **Hybrid approach:** Regex for common formats, Claude for edge cases
- **Streaming:** Show results as they're parsed (future)

---

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these guidelines:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

### Code Style

- Use TypeScript for all new code
- Follow existing component patterns
- Reference [DESIGN_SYSTEM.md](DESIGN_SYSTEM.md) for UI components
- Run `npm run lint` before committing

---

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **Claude API** by Anthropic for native PDF reading
- **Next.js** team for the amazing framework
- **Recharts** for beautiful, customizable charts
- **Tailwind CSS** for rapid UI development

---

## 📚 Documentation

- [CODE_ARCHITECTURE.md](CODE_ARCHITECTURE.md) - Detailed code structure and data flow
- [DESIGN_SYSTEM.md](DESIGN_SYSTEM.md) - UI design system and component guidelines
- [Claude/ARCHITECTURE_DECISION_RECORD.md](Claude/ARCHITECTURE_DECISION_RECORD.md) - Key architectural decisions
- [Claude/IMPLEMENTATION_PLAN.md](Claude/IMPLEMENTATION_PLAN.md) - Development roadmap

---

## 🐛 Known Issues

- API latency variance can cause inconsistent parse times (50-90s range for large PDFs)
- Some edge cases in merchant name cleaning (e.g., foreign characters)
- Charts may not render on very old browsers (IE11)

---

## 🔮 Roadmap

### v1.1 (Q2 2025)
- Budget targets per category
- Month-over-month comparison
- Enhanced AI insights with more specific observations

### v1.2 (Q3 2025)
- Color-coded charts for visual consistency
- Export to CSV/Excel
- Multi-statement analysis

### v2.0 (Future)
- Optional user accounts for history
- Recurring analysis reminders
- Integration with budgeting apps

---

**Built with ❤️ for privacy-conscious users who want financial insights without the hassle.**

Commit message:

feat: Integrate Stripe payment links for Pro tier upgrades
- Added environment variables for monthly and annual Stripe payment links to facilitate Pro tier subscriptions.
- Updated the Pro page to include payment options and email capture for manual verification.
- Enhanced the UpgradeModal to provide direct links for Stripe payments, streamlining the upgrade process for users.

README.md, after:

# FrugalScan 💰

> Privacy-first personal finance insights in 60 seconds. No account linking required.

[![Live Demo](https://img.shields.io/badge/demo-frugalscan.com-blue)](https://frugalscan.com)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green.svg)](LICENSE)
[![Next.js](https://img.shields.io/badge/Next.js-14-black)](https://nextjs.org/)
[![TypeScript](https://img.shields.io/badge/TypeScript-5-blue)](https://www.typescriptlang.org/)

## 🎯 What is FrugalScan?

FrugalScan analyzes your bank statement PDFs using AI to reveal spending patterns, detect subscriptions, and provide personalized financial insights—all without requiring you to link your bank account.

**[Try it live →](https://frugalscan.com)**

### The Problem

Traditional budgeting apps require linking your bank account, which many people find uncomfortable. They're also overwhelming with features most users never need. Sometimes you just want quick answers: *Where is my money going?*

### The Solution

Upload a bank statement PDF. Get actionable insights in 60 seconds. No signup, no account linking, no persistent data storage.

---

## ✨ Features

### Current (v1.0)
- ✅ **AI-Powered PDF Parsing** - 99.7% accuracy across all bank formats using Claude API
- ✅ **Smart Categorization** - 200+ merchant keywords automatically categorize spending
- ✅ **Subscription Detection** - Identifies recurring charges you might have forgotten
- ✅ **Personalized Insights** - AI-generated observations about your spending patterns
- ✅ **Interactive Charts** - Visualize spending by category and merchant
- ✅ **Category Drill-Down** - Click any category to see top merchants within it
- ✅ **Privacy-First** - No database, no accounts, no data persistence
- ✅ **Multi-Page Support** - Parallel processing handles statements up to 20+ pages
- ✅ **Mobile Responsive** - Works on all devices
- ✅ **Export Ready** - Print or save results as PDF

### Coming Soon (v1.1-1.2)
- 🔜 **Budget Targets** - Set spending limits per category
- 🔜 **Month-over-Month Trends** - Compare multiple statements
- 🔜 **Enhanced AI Insights** - More specific, surprising observations
- 🔜 **Color-Coded Charts** - Visual category consistency across all charts

---

## 🏗️ Architecture

### Tech Stack

| Layer | Technology | Why |
|-------|------------|-----|
| Framework | Next.js 14 (App Router) | SSR, API routes, modern React patterns |
| Language | TypeScript | Type safety, better developer experience |
| Styling | Tailwind CSS v3 | Rapid development, Apple-inspired design |
| AI | Claude API (Anthropic) | Native PDF reading, best-in-class accuracy |
| Charts | Recharts | Full control over styling and interactions |
| Hosting | Vercel | Seamless deployment, edge functions |

### Why Claude API for PDF Parsing?

Initial attempts with `pdf-parse` + regex achieved only 70-85% accuracy and required maintaining 50+ regex patterns for different bank formats.

Claude API's native PDF reading delivers:
- **99.7% accuracy** (tested on 196 transactions, $10,703 total)
- **Universal compatibility** (works with all bank formats)
- **Context understanding** (handles refunds, pending transactions, foreign currency)
- **Zero maintenance** (no brittle regex patterns)

**Trade-off:** ~$0.02 per analysis (Haiku) + $0.05 for insights (Sonnet) = **$0.07 total cost per user**

See [ARCHITECTURE_DECISION_RECORD.md](Claude/ARCHITECTURE_DECISION_RECORD.md) for full rationale.

### Data Flow

```
1. PDF Upload
   ↓
   User uploads bank statement PDF via drag-and-drop
   ↓
   app/api/parse-statement/route.ts
   ↓
   lib/parse-with-claude.ts
   ├── If >5 pages: Split into 4-page chunks → Parallel processing (3 concurrent)
   └── If ≤5 pages: Single request
   ↓
   RawTransaction[] (validated against schema)
   ↓

2. Client-Side Categorization
   ↓
   lib/categorize.ts
   ├── cleanMerchantName() - Remove junk, standardize format
   ├── categorizeTransaction() - Match 200+ keywords → category
   └── detectSubscriptions() - Whitelist known services
   ↓
   CategorizedTransaction[] + Subscription[]
   ↓

3. Analysis & Insights
   ↓
   lib/analysis.ts
   ├── calculateSummary() - Totals, averages, top category
   ├── getCategoryBreakdown() - For pie chart
   └── getTopMerchants() - For bar chart
   ↓
   app/api/analyze/route.ts
   ↓
   lib/claude-insights.ts
   └── generateInsights() - AI-powered personalized tips
   ↓
   AnalysisResult displayed in results dashboard
```

**Key Design Decisions:**
- **Categorization is client-side** - Reduces API costs, instant feedback
- **Parallel processing for large PDFs** - 4-page chunks, max 3 concurrent requests
- **Strict validation** - All transactions validated before categorization
- **Positive amounts only** - `type` field indicates debit/credit direction

---

## 🚀 Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ and npm
- Anthropic API key ([get one here](https://console.anthropic.com/))

### Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/frugalscan.git
cd frugalscan

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Set up environment variables
cp .env.example .env.local
# Edit .env.local and add your ANTHROPIC_API_KEY
```

### Development

```bash
# Start development server
npm run dev

# Open http://localhost:3000
```

### Build for Production

```bash
# Build the application
npm run build

# Start production server
npm start
```

---

## 📁 Project Structure

```
frugalscan/
├── app/
│   ├── api/
│   │   ├── parse-statement/    # PDF parsing endpoint
│   │   └── analyze/             # AI insights endpoint
│   ├── results/                 # Results dashboard page
│   └── page.tsx                 # Landing page
├── components/
│   ├── ui/                      # Reusable UI components
│   ├── charts/                 # Data visualizations
│   └── sections/                # Page sections
├── lib/
│   ├── parse-with-claude.ts     # PDF parsing orchestrator
│   ├── categorize.ts            # Transaction categorization
│   ├── analysis.ts              # Summary calculations
│   └── claude-insights.ts       # AI insights generation
├── types/
│   └── index.ts                 # TypeScript interfaces
└── contexts/
    └── AnalysisContext.tsx      # Shared analysis state
```

See [CODE_ARCHITECTURE.md](CODE_ARCHITECTURE.md) for detailed architecture documentation.

---

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

Create a `.env.local` file:

```env
ANTHROPIC_API_KEY=your_api_key_here
NEXT_PUBLIC_STRIPE_PRO_MONTHLY_LINK=https://buy.stripe.com/your-monthly-link
NEXT_PUBLIC_STRIPE_PRO_ANNUAL_LINK=https://buy.stripe.com/your-annual-link
```

> Stripe Payment Links are public URLs (not secrets), but using env vars makes it easy to swap links between dev and production.

### Parallel Processing Settings

In `lib/parse-with-claude.ts`:
- **Chunk size:** 4 pages per chunk (optimal balance)
- **Concurrency:** 3 simultaneous requests (rate limit safe)
- **Threshold:** PDFs >5 pages use parallel processing

### Categorization Keywords

Add merchant keywords in `lib/constants.ts` under `MERCHANT_KEYWORDS` to improve categorization accuracy.

---

## 💳 Payments (Manual MVP)

FrugalScan currently uses **Stripe Payment Links** for a simple manual MVP:

- The **Upgrade modal** and `/pro` page both link to:
  - `NEXT_PUBLIC_STRIPE_PRO_MONTHLY_LINK`
  - `NEXT_PUBLIC_STRIPE_PRO_ANNUAL_LINK`
- Stripe handles checkout and sends the user a receipt email.
- You manually enable Pro access for early customers (see `Claude/IMPLEMENTATION_PLAN.md` Session 14–16).

This keeps the first version of payments low-code and easy to validate. Automated Stripe Checkout + webhooks will be added in the Pro tier launch sessions.

---

## 🧪 Testing

### Manual Testing Checklist

When modifying parsing or categorization:

1. **Accuracy:** Transaction count matches expected
2. **Totals:** Debits/credits match statement summary
3. **Validation:** No transactions rejected (check console)
4. **Categories:** <15% in "Other" category
5. **Charts:** Pie shows categories, bar shows merchants (high→low)
6. **Subscriptions:** Known services detected
7. **Merchant names:** Cleaned properly (no junk codes)

### Test Data

Use real bank statement PDFs (anonymized) to test accuracy. Current test results:
- **196 transactions** tested
- **$10,703 total** processed
- **99.7% accuracy** achieved

---

## 📊 Performance

### Current Metrics

| Metric | Value |
|--------|-------|
| Parse time (5 pages) | ~20 seconds |
| Parse time (13 pages) | ~56 seconds (parallel) |
| Accuracy | 99.7% |
| Cost per analysis | ~$0.07 |
| Client-side categorization | <100ms |

### Optimization Opportunities

- **Caching:** Identical PDFs could be cached
- **Hybrid approach:** Regex for common formats, Claude for edge cases
- **Streaming:** Show results as they're parsed (future)

---

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please follow these guidelines:

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

### Code Style

- Use TypeScript for all new code
- Follow existing component patterns
- Reference [DESIGN_SYSTEM.md](DESIGN_SYSTEM.md) for UI components
- Run `npm run lint` before committing

---

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

---

## 🙏 Acknowledgments

- **Claude API** by Anthropic for native PDF reading
- **Next.js** team for the amazing framework
- **Recharts** for beautiful, customizable charts
- **Tailwind CSS** for rapid UI development

---

## 📚 Documentation

- [CODE_ARCHITECTURE.md](CODE_ARCHITECTURE.md) - Detailed code structure and data flow
- [DESIGN_SYSTEM.md](DESIGN_SYSTEM.md) - UI design system and component guidelines
- [Claude/ARCHITECTURE_DECISION_RECORD.md](Claude/ARCHITECTURE_DECISION_RECORD.md) - Key architectural decisions
- [Claude/IMPLEMENTATION_PLAN.md](Claude/IMPLEMENTATION_PLAN.md) - Development roadmap

---

## 🐛 Known Issues

- API latency variance can cause inconsistent parse times (50-90s range for large PDFs)
- Some edge cases in merchant name cleaning (e.g., foreign characters)
- Charts may not render on very old browsers (IE11)

---

## 🔮 Roadmap

### v1.1 (Q2 2025)
- Budget targets per category
- Month-over-month comparison
- Enhanced AI insights with more specific observations

### v1.2 (Q3 2025)
- Color-coded charts for visual consistency
- Export to CSV/Excel
- Multi-statement analysis

### v2.0 (Future)
- Optional user accounts for history
- Recurring analysis reminders
- Integration with budgeting apps

---

**Built with ❤️ for privacy-conscious users who want financial insights without the hassle.**
